Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, from time to time on this program, other visitors
and I have had an occasion to say something about the Tom Bigby Waterway in which I have
been interested for a long, long time.
I think it's important that all Tennesseans and people in Mississippi, Alabama, Kentucky
and the whole nation know about this very remarkable project.
For our section of the country, I think it is the most important proposed development
that we have had since the coming of the Tennessee Valley Authority back in 1933.
It's going to affect our communities and our industry, our agriculture and there will
be a great advancement for every section of our state and several adjacent states.
To describe and talk about the Tennessee Tom Bigby Waterway and more detail, I have
invited and I appreciate his acceptance Colonel Robert C. Marshall, who is the Assistant
Director of the Civil Works Division of the Corps of Engineers under whose jurisdiction
this waterway comes.
To come and tell us something about it and to tell the meaning of it and what's going
to be done to the listeners over this station.
Colonel Marshall is awfully good to have you with us and we appreciate very much your coming
here.
You've been in the Corps of Engineers for many years, I believe, have you not?
Well, about 20, sir.
And you were telling me that during the war you spent some time in the volunteer state.
I did indeed.
It was my pleasure to be assigned to Camp Forest, Tennessee, Nertelahoma, and also to engage
in what were then known as a Tennessee maneuver.
Well, Camp Forest was a very important military establishment.
It has gone as you may know and Arnold Engineering Development Center occupies much of the same
territory that we would welcome you back to Tennessee whenever you can come.
I thank you, sir.
Now, Colonel Marshall, tell us something about the Tom Bigby Waterway.
It shows where it starts and where it goes to and a little bit about the history of it
if you would.
Well, sir, the Tennessee Tom Bigby, as it is known now, is designed to connect the Tom Bigby
River with the Tennessee River.
This route has been considered for many years.
The early French settlers looked at the divide just below the Tennessee and hoped to build
the canal to the south in order to connect to Tennessee River with the Gulf.
Now, the Tom Bigby River comes up to about where this arrow is.
Is that correct?
Yes, sir.
The natural stream terminates about this area and then we would go into a canal type operation.
As I recall, back in the 1870s, the Corps of Engineers actually recommended the building of
a shallow channel connecting the Gulf with the Tennessee River.
Is that?
In 1875, the Corps of Engineers rendered a report to the Congress indicating that a four-foot
channel could be constructed, essentially along this alignment, at the cost of only $1,700,000.
Yes.
Another...
Picklick Bamm was built here, I believe, about 1935 or six.
And that is toward Chattanooga, where the canal, where the waterway would enter.
And how water that does make it possible for water to come down to the ten locks of the
Tennessee Tom Bigby waterway.
Is that...
Yes, sir.
Just like Gattu and Malayka on the top of Panama Canal makes it possible.
Yes, sir, the fact that Tickwick Pool is available and has an adequate supply of water,
which could be diverted to the canal, will permit the operation of these various locks.
And in fact makes it canal much more feasible.
I was in the House of Representatives at the time back in 1946 when the Tennessee Tom Bigby
was approved by the Congress in that year.
And then I believe that there was some restudy, a proclamation for a restudy in 1956,
or the engineers didn't make a restudy about that time.
That's correct, sir.
There was some debate and perhaps some doubts regarding the economic aspect of the project.
And so we were directed to undertake a restudy of the economics, which we have recently finished
and have under the report.
And what is the report, the economics of this great development?
Well, fundamentally, as in all our projects, the determination was made of the total cost
of the project.
It's about $250 million, a little more than that.
And then based on the 50-year, expected, at least 50-year, expected economic life of the
project, an annual cost was determined.
An annual cost of about $12 million, and compared to that annual cost, an annual benefit
was also determined.
And we then found that the benefit exceeded the cost, and therefore that it was, in fact,
an economically justifiable project.
And how much traffic on the waterway to you in this debate will be the average over
a period of 50 years?
About 12 million, a little over 12 million tons per year, sir.
Now the details as I understand it, how deep will the waterway be?
It will be a nine-foot project initially throughout its length.
In constructing the ten locks, which you mentioned earlier, we will provide for 13-foot
depths, should in the later life of the project traffic warrant a construction to that added
depth.
But fundamentally it will provide for a nine-foot navigable waterway, a varying widths 150 feet
in some sections and wider in others.
Yes, but eventually if it needed to be done, it could be a 13-foot depth, and the locks
will be built so as to accommodate traffic with 13-foot, that's correct.
That's correct.
Then we will have a slack waterway from the Oehaw River here at New York, the Duke of
course.
This is a Tennessee lake.
Sometimes it's called a Kentucky lake, but really the part in Tennessee is a slack water
lake.
And then the slack water all the way down to the Gulf so that the barges and ships can go
either way to the Oehaw in slack waters.
That's fundamentally correct.
If they want to go up the Tennessee to Knoxville, the water, of course the river is navigable
and the water is comparatively slack.
Then of course there is a canal between the Kentucky lake and the Cumberland bark lake on
the Cumberland River, which will make it available for traffic on the Cumberland.
What will be shipped down the canal largely and figuring the economic benefits of Colonel
Marshall?
We have predicted based on comparison of rates and market areas, areas, growth of population,
and the other factors, we predict a considerable movement of middle-western grains either to
the Gulf and to southerly markets or perhaps to the Alabama Mississippi Georgia area.
This would be feed grains, primarily.
Our feed grains are farmers and tonuses.
Yes, they are.
Absolutely.
We also visualize that there is a potential movement of coal from Tennessee to markets in
the south.
Primarily the markets would be in the steam generation of electricity.
Perhaps in Florida or even places where they use gas at the present time.
Yes, sir.
Florida right now is a large consumer of Tennessee and Kentucky coal for its generation of electricity
and we visualize that coal will remain competitive in that area.
As we all know there is a great deal of coal in the Cumberland section of Kentucky and Tennessee,
which we hope will be subject to being barged on the Cumberland River.
This east and middle Tennessee section has a great deal of coal so there is northern Alabama
and of course western Kentucky is rich in coal so you do envision a great deal of coal
traffic down to the Gulf.
It's a great potential, yes sir.
Then how about from the Gulf back north among the waterway?
Primarily a waterway of this nature inherently lends itself to the movement of bulk commodities
and probably the most significant is petroleum products.
Well, what of course benefit consumers along the waterway by virtue of less expensive
transportation of heating fuels and gasoline.
And there is also a potential and a predictable movement of fertilizers from the Caribbean
and Florida area to the north.
A phosphate and things that that's ordered.
So it is going to be one of the great important waterways in our country.
The colonel as you know, they could people along the Mississippi and Memphis, Dixburg
and New Orleans have now joined in recommending the development of the Tom Bay because they
do not feel that it meant the in that it's going to interfere with the good traffic that
they have on the Mississippi River.
I think so, sir.
I think Mississippi, the state of Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee and more recently Kentucky
have joined together and formed an authority and this authority and hence Mississippi and
the other states recognize the advantage, the flexibility and the cheap transportation
that is afforded by this waterway.
Yes, there is a comeback between the states of Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee and Kentucky
and perhaps some other which was approved by Congress and they do have an association
that's been very effective in pushing the Tom Bay Bay waterway.
A colonel, I know this isn't in the budget because your report didn't come to the Congress
in time for it to be or rather to the administration in time for it to be put in the budget but it's
my understanding that you can efficiently expand or your capability of expanding for the
next year, next fiscal year is a million dollars in advanced planning for this waterway.
It would be actually our planning is pretty well along so it would not only permit the completion
of some added detail plans but actual construction could be initiated at the, we would start at
the most southerly lock, the Gainesville lock which is this area.
And so that if we get the million dollars as we hope to and on the appropriations committee
we are working for it for this next fiscal year you can actually begin some construction.
That's correct.
I understand that this may be a place where atomic energy will be used to a good advantage
on the blasting and the moving of dirt it may be necessary as part of the contemplation.
This project does lend itself to the peaceful application of nuclear energy particularly
in the section known as the divide cut which is just south of the Tennessee River.
In this area the depth of cut is approximately 150 feet and by use of nuclear explosives
detonated below the surface with no fallout or other radiation problems this excavation
could be constructed at a cost at least 10% less expensive than if conventional excavation
methods were used.
So we do hope that the current test series and perhaps subsequent test series will provide
the engineering and safety information necessary for us to more accurately determine these
costs based on current information we are confident that it is feasible to employ nuclear
explosives in this area.
Well ladies and gentlemen I know that you've enjoyed having this explanation of this great
new imaginative and wonderful project that's going to come our way by the explanation that's
been made by Colonel Marshall and we thank you very much for being with us today my
pleasure.
Thank you.
Until next to the program that's all for now.
Ladies and gentlemen friends of Tennessee from time to time on this program we have talked
about the Trade Expansion Act which President Kennedy has recommended and about which we are
also interested.
This I think is the biggest matter that will come before this Congress by far.
Bill has passed the House of Representatives giving the President extended authority
and connection with our trade agreement program and it will soon be coming up in the Senate.
So I thought that we would use this program today to talk about it and to give us some
facts and information about the program we are very fortunate today in having with us Mr.
Howard C. Peterson the assistant to the President on trade policies.
We certainly would like to have you with us Mr. Peterson real pleasure Sunday and I
Mr. Peterson has been appearing before committees giving information telling what our present
situation is what the New York expansion will mean and why it's so necessary.
But Mr. Peterson I believe that you are a very distinct well you are a big bank for big
and several ways I'm sure physically and otherwise from Philadelphia aren't you.
I am.
I have good many friends in the banking fraternity and Tennessee too.
Yes I know you do.
I was lemming.
Oh, I was saying it.
We had American bankers as well.
We are all very proud of Sam Fleming from over at Nashville and he is the President of
American Bank Association.
Of course I know a lot of bankers but I'm not always very happy to see them Mr. Peterson.
I know.
You know some of my people asked me to come down and pay notes and loads of that sort.
But friends of course in Tennessee we have always been internationally minded.
We understand the importance of exporting goods to other nations and of course we've
been able to create statesmen of Tennessee and Mr. Cordell Hold founder of the Trade
Agreement Act.
The inception of really the whole liberal trade policy of the United States started with
Mr. Cordell Hold in 1934 and Trade Expansion Act which is now before the Senate is a natural
continuation of these policies which were approved some 11 times by the Congress of the
United States in extending the act.
Well Mr. Hold and his great statesmanship showed that how trade was necessary for employment
for industrial expansion for the farmers of America and also a very important part which
I have been interested in as a person who attends NATO Parliamentary meetings and other
things is that Mr. Hold preached and showed that if you trade with the people of the world
you have a better chance of living in peace with them.
So that we are interested in Tennessee but I think at this time we might also hear from
the President of the United States and his State of the Union message he very briefly put
forth the challenge in connection with the Trade Agreements Expansion Act and so they'll
hear from the President of the United States.
Now Mr. Peterson this new bill that we are considering gives the President an extended
power in connection with tariffs and trade agreements.
What is the necessity for it?
It has taken place in the world and it makes this situation necessary.
There is a new trading world and the best demonstration of this is the great and phenomenal
growth of the common market in Europe.
This was only started in 1958 which was the last time that the Trade Agreements program
came before the Congress.
You have the Battle of Luxe countries, Belgium and Holland and Netherlands and Luxembourg
and France and Germany and Italy and they are going to abolish the tariffs between
the Britain and Britain who is now asked to join and it is succession to this market.
I think seems reasonably assured and they are really doing.
When they are creating a market just as we create a market in the 1789 with no tariffs
between the States and with a common external tariff against the outsiders.
This is the most important market which our exporters enjoy.
How much did we accept?
Seven like six billion dollars last year and then we united Kingdom and the Western Europe
and from this market something we are taking about four billion so we have a very favorable
balance of trade with the balance on the plus side of about two billion dollars.
It is our most important market for farm produce.
They take great deal of our wheat, our tobacco, our cotton, many of our products of our farm
but even in manufacturers we have a balance of terrible balance of trade with them.
One thing we know is that they are going to abolish all the tariffs between the member
states and erect this common external tariff and unless we can kind of batter down this
common external tariff so that the discrimination against this is at least tolerable and we can
still get in and sell our goods we are going to lose our position in this important market.
This is kind of the threat side but there is also a challenge side.
Just talk a little bit more about what it means.
In the world generally last year we exported something from neighborhood of 20 billion dollars
and we imported about 15 so that we sold about 5 billion more than we took in.
What does this mean to the American people and to the manufacturers and to the farmers
and the pyrrhicians and the factories?
Well it means jobs, it means profits, when you analyze these figures, there is not really
that I have.
There is no reason to talk about the difference between the 20 billion and the 15 because of
this 15 billion of imports.
About 60 percent of things we either do not produce at all or produce an insufficient
or a whole range of industrial goods which create jobs because without them our factories
could run all the things like tropical agriculture products which we like like bananas and coffee
and cocoa and tea.
So that you only really in terms of job competing have imports of about 6 billion dollars.
You have to compare this with the 20 billion dollar figure.
There have been lots of estimates made of what the jobs involved are.
I think the labor of the department, the labor of the statistics is about 3 million jobs
and factories directly related to export.
Industrial plants and about great many on the farms of the United States where we export
a great deal of our farm products.
There was, and that truth is right.
Well I think the 10 billion dollars I would like to know just briefly but the present export
program means to the people of Tennessee.
According to the record almost 78 million jobs in Tennessee in 1900 and 78 thousand.
78 thousand.
I know that Tennessee is a lot of the important ones.
Quite that many.
Not quite that many.
But anyway, almost 77 thousand employees worked in factories that exported more than 220 million
dollars.
And also that we are 60th in that year in manufacturing exports.
And we found that in agriculture in Tennessee in 1961 that we exported products amounting
to 93 million dollars.
Eight million in livestock and animals, 600 thousand fruit and nuts, 600 thousand
vegetables.
That we had 37,600 farm workers were employed in producing things that were exported.
And we have a substantial stake in Tennessee in this program.
We are of course worried about the fact that we have had a Google drain against the United
States for off and on for some years.
Unless we can export and have a favorable trade balance, that Google drain will continue
to be larger.
We will get larger and larger.
And if we could actually increase our export surplus, this is one possible way of avoiding
any drain on our goal.
And well, Alan, I would say our export surplus has meant a whole lot to employment and industries
on the farm.
There is people of this country.
Yes.
Now, what is your prediction if we can negotiate somehow with this great common market that
has become a reality?
Do you think it will mean even more additional employment for the people in the United States?
Well, I wish though, Sun Gerrit, I think it's very hard to kind of prove anything about
the future because the future is rather inscrutable and so much depends on the general level of
the economic activity of the trading partners.
But we know that we're going to be worse than in our position if we're not able to deal
with the common market.
And I think we have the opportunity of enhancing our export position in this market because
it has to big demand factor.
It is growing so rapidly and it is our most important.
Now, of course, some industries are going to be adversely affected.
We know that because in some they perhaps can manufacture things in other countries so
reasonably than we can.
All their provisions and the bill for taking care of these adversely affected.
And I think that the proposal in the trade expansion act make better provisions for
these possibilities and have ever been suggested to the Congress before because there's a program
of trade adjustment assistance whereby small firms, if they're hurt by import competition,
can obtain governmental assistance in the forms of loans.
And workers, if they're unemployed or if they find they're under employed because of
import competition, can obtain the allowances which will permit them to be retrained for jobs
in which they can better compete.
But I don't think really where going to feel these hurts.
In the first place, this program will go into effect only very gradually.
The act has the odds that any reductions in tariffs may not be put into effect in a period
of less than five years.
So this gives a lot of time for, and I just a normal adjustment.
And of course the big thing that appeals to me and I think all Americans is that by having
a great trading area that we are gaining in strength as against the Soviet bloc.
And I think it might be well to hear the President again as to what this kind of leadership
means.
Well, I know that Mr. Kruyshev doesn't want to see this common market become a reality
and he doesn't want to be sweating.
He's fighting it to come a part of it because that means that economically and industrially
and in all kinds of strength we'll have a much greater advantage over the communist
bloc block and therefore a better chance for peace in the world, doesn't it?
I still only believe that, sir.
Well, thank you very much, Mr. Peterson, for being with us and that's all for this
time, friends.
This is Estes' Keefe over speaking and I'm happy to say a few words in behalf of my
very good friend and my able colleague in the United States Senate Wayne Morris.
Senator Morris and I have shared many fights for worthwhile causes in the Senate and I have
always been proud to stand shoulder to shoulder with him in these efforts.
He enjoys the highest regard of his colleagues, the cost of his courage and his great devotion
to principle.
Let me tell you about a special talent for hard work that is one of Senator Morris's
many able qualifications.
I have the privilege of being a member of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
I know firsthand about Senator Morris's diligent work and his testimony and behalf of
appropriations to be made for the state of Oregon.
I have jotted down some of the highlights in the last few years of Senator Morris's effort
to effectively pursue and persuade the getting of appropriations for great projects in
the state of Oregon.
Let me list just a few.
In the nature of public works, there are many great bams under construction which he
has fought far successfully in the Senate and before the appropriations committee.
John Day, Krueger, Green Peter, Hills Creek and of course recently the 40-foot channel
on the Columbia which means so much to Portland and to that section generally.
In range work, he has fought for special appropriations for receding burned ranges.
This year he obtained funds to begin a model range rehabilitation program in eastern Oregon.
Senator Morris has framed the appropriations committee with the material to support appropriations
for water pollution control, hospital construction in the nation and in Oregon also.
His work to increase forest access road construction in the national forest is not matched by that
of any other senator.
I think it would be difficult to find another member of the United States Senate who does
more than Senator Wayne Morris does to protect the economy and the welfare of the state that
he so ably represents.
Oregon and the nation need Wayne Morris and the Senate and I hope that you are going
to keep them there.
Thank you.